In this paper, I will be discussing a dilemma for data control: whether to allow consumers access to generated data by
their connected devices or let manufacturers keep it private. To answer this dilemma, I will be providing how a Utilitarian,
virtue ethicist, or Kantian may decide on the morally permissible action. I think users must have more control over the
generated data from their smart devices, and I will prove this through Kantian reasoning.

A utilitarian may approach the dilemma through a consequentialist lens. First, let us consider the possible outcome of
manufacturers keeping the data to themselves. Benefit-wise, the generated data allows the manufacturers of a product to
improve, and thus, for society, the improvement of a product gives happiness to their consumers. No cost is also
involved since the gathering of data is done deceitfully; therefore, no consumers are harmed at all.

Now, let us consider the outcome of manufacturers granting users influence over their data. Benefit-wise, the data may help society create more innovative and sophisticated products like Chat-GPT since consumers can share the data with outside parties. Consumers will be more at ease as well since they will have more control over their data; thus, users having power over their data produces happiness in society overall. Despite its utopian benefits, it also has consequences. Since publicizing the data allows individuals to see what kind of data is being generated deceitfully, mistrust between consumers and manufacturers might occur. Less data might also be generated since users can control what information goes out, which would contradict the benefits I explained above. Sharing the manufacturer's data may also lead to more competition for a specific product since outside parties can have access to it. In the article, one manufacturer also voiced out that they may be vulnerable to cybersecurity threats and copyright infringements.
Through the cost-benefit analysis of the two courses of action in the dilemma, I think an act utilitarian would say that the morally permissible action is to allow manufacturers to keep the data to themselves and not share it with the public since the opposite action produces a contradiction and more pain between consumers and manufacturers overall. Of course, this action is immorally permissible, and thus utilitarianism is not the right theory to answer this dilemma.
Meanwhile, for virtue ethics, a virtuous manufacturer would grant consumers influence to their generated data. Allowing customers to control what data is generated shows that a manufacturer respects their customers' privacy. By not being afraid of publicizing their data, they show that they are honest manufacturers that do not breach customers’ privacy. Overall, one virtue that stands out in this dilemma would be the trustworthiness of a manufacturer, which is an Aristotelian ethical virtue. By having the virtue of trustworthiness, a manufacturer shows the public that they are an honest and dependable company.
Although the generated data of a manufacturer might make them vulnerable to cybersecurity and copyright infringement, what only matters in this sense is the relationship between the manufacturer and its customers. However, virtue-ethics’ reasoning is not fully convincing in this dilemma. It is not only because a manufacturer should be trustworthy to customers but also because there is data privacy involved. And thus, shouldn’t we get one’s consent for data?
Lastly, Kantian ethics has the most compelling argument for deciding the most permissible moral action in the dilemma. A Kantian would argue that the most morally permissible action is to grant consumers control over the generated data by their smart devices. Not because of the consequences or to be a virtuous manufacturer, but because consumers are rational beings that deserve respect for their data.
According to Kantian ethics, we must treat rational beings as ends in themselves and never as mere means. If an individual is self-governed and able to make her own free decisions based on pure reasoning, we must respect that she has her own goals and intentions and is not an instrument to be used for our benefit.
Consumers buy products because they are free-willed beings who use reasoning even when buying; some would consider their budget or if they truly needed such a thing. Therefore, consumers are free-willed beings capable of rational choices. Consumers must have freedom of autonomy.
Since consumers are rational beings, we must never treat them as mere means but as ends in themselves. How can manufacturers treat consumers as mere means? By getting data without their consent. Consumers are not things that we can use to generate data from; they are rational beings that require privacy and consent. By allowing users control over their data, we allow them to control what kind of data will be taken from them and thus treat them as ends in themselves.
When consumers buy a product, is that not the same thing as giving consent to manufacturers? Indeed, according to Kant, people treat each other as mere means in their daily lives. As an example, one goes to a restaurant using the server as a mere means to get one’s food, while the server uses the customer to earn a living; is that not the same thing as the relationship between manufacturer and consumer? Consumers use the product to help with their daily lives, while the manufacturer uses the consumer's data to improve their product or to earn more money.
Furthermore, especially in our modern lives, whenever users buy a product, they sign an agreement with the manufacturer or accept an online agreement. The consumer, therefore, has given their consent to be used to generate data from.
Indeed, the relationship between manufacturer and consumer using each other as mere means does recognize that each is a rational being still, the consumer has not given in-principle consent to what data is to be generated from them. The difference between the server-customer relationship and the manufacturer-consumer relationship is that the server does not take any valuable data or property from a customer, while the manufacturer does. So, the manufacturer generating data from the user without the user's knowledge is a violation of privacy and the humanity formula.
To answer the second objection, signing or accepting an agreement equals consent, we must understand deeply what consent is. According to Oxford Dictionaries, “consent is permission to do something” (Oxford Dictionary). Permission requires awareness of what someone is permitted to do. Without knowing fully what one is permitting, is that not the same thing as deceitfulness and thus not using someone as an end in themselves? Indeed, somewhere in the agreement, it might say that a consumer’s data might be generated by the manufacturer, or the product might generate this particular data about the consumer. However, we must understand that most people do not read these lengthy agreements. Thus, without being fully aware of it, the consumer is not formally consenting to the manufacturer's practices.
As a conclusion, by giving customers influence over the generated data from smart products, Consumers would be formally giving consent to what data they agreed to share with the public. They are also aware of where their data will be used since it will be public and can give it to whoever they choose.